David's
U
chasing the question of what could
broadly be said a
revolution um you start with idea of
social change of so how something
changes and uh what David finds
interesting about human societies is not
so much that they change and that they
change when revolutionary situations
happen when they're um clust struggles
are at higher points or whatever what is
interesting is that societies do not
change in all the rest of the
times uh how how is that possible why is
that the case why do you have to wait
for some kind of situation uh what do
people
do well uh conventional approach tells
us that
um societies are sort of like organisms
uh or self balancing systems uh they
like like an animal or like
ecosystem they keep going in existing
form until they cannot go any longer and
when some kind of conflict reaches the
highest point only then opportunity to
change arises well this approach uh for
David is missing all the intentional
actions of people
who who actually wake up every day and
make Society happen again make Society
happen again in the same form as it was
yesterday uh it just doesn't happen by
nature or by by God's design or
something like that someone has to have
an intention to do so and like most all
everyone has to have an intention to do
so
uh the word we use for broadly
describing people tendency to produce
the society in in a certain form is
value uh the value of action in this
context is ability of any action to
create a society where people seek an
opportunity to emulate this action it's
like actions producing themselves
and uh chasing the question of value one
of the pieces that are underly the
question of value is a practice of
fetishism so this is where this piece
comes into into
discussion the
fetishism was uh entered into public
debate in around 1700 something or 1800
something the history has to do
with Portuguese merchants selling to
Africa trying to exchange glass beads
and different kind of junk for
gold well what the merchants discovered
is that every time you have to exchange
something you have to go through some
kind of ritual with people you're going
to exchange things you have to kind of
create a market you have to stipulate
the rates of change the regimes of
property and so on and the practices
that um the Christian merchants selling
in and if you ask Christian Merchants
would you honor the
the rules of your deal uh he would say
yes I swear by God but uh how what would
African person swear swear by and uh
what ends up happening is that African
people just take different pits of Chunk
wood whatever uh Stones anything that
like uh a a leg of of an animal or
something or like mix some dirt and a
drink and in the water and drink it and
that would be and they would name that
thing by by some kind of name and then
say that this thing would have power
over us it would punish us if we don't
not respect the terms of the deal that
we're making with
you so for European Merchants who been
looking for uh like you need a guard on
other side with whom you could like make
a deal and there isn't a God uh they can
see that these African people just make
up uh deities on like on a
fly the term fet is interesting what
what David shows in this piece uh what
term fetish is interesting
is by the time these Merchants arrive in
Africa Christian thought already has an
idea of
idol that is a any image of Supernatural
entity which isn't Christian God is a
demon uh and as like
what pagans worship some kind of Devils
demons which influence them this idea at
least accepts the existence of
Supernatural behind uh beliefs
of whatever the the the other right uh
what merchants was trying to avoid
exactly by calling it fetish is to point
out that well these African people are
so stupid they can't even properly
believe in demons that there is no
Supernatural behind their their fetish
be behind their Idols because well they
just it is visible how they pick up
anything and then just agree on the spot
to treat it as some kind of super
Supernatural
entity so that was very disturbing for
for for the materialistically inclined
European
merchants and they tried to reduce the
Africans to some kind of arbitrary
state that that well uh the value for
Africans is arbitrary they treat gold
they know that gold is important but
they exchange it for useless junk so
like and even in a domain of religion of
social values they can just make up
anything and and and just agree to make
to treat it as
valuable well this is this is origin of
the story of
fetish uh how it entered in European
debate and by the
1930 it accumulated so many different
meanings that it was decided to
basically abandon that
term
uh it
became it stopped meaning anything but
for David's research it was necessary to
go back
to influence of Marx and Marx employed
the term of fetish to the specifically
different kind
of uh usage
um when
sociology and marks um
included talk about fetish the
conventional understanding is that I
quote basically we are used to seeing
fetishism as an illusion we create
things and then Fall Down and Worship
that which we ourself have
made that is uh anytime we uh in the
presence of a fetish we can see people
treating inan M objects as uh possessing
Consciousness intelligences and U
Wills uh treating inanimate or even
invisible objects as
um as people for purposes of entering
into relationships with them like uh you
can think that object has a capacity to
judge you or to inspire you or to affect
and you or something like
that well this is what Marx
uh Springs
from he looks at
uh uh the the
the the theory of fetishism for Marx is
is a part of uh his alienation idea that
uh
basically
the
only whenever
human feels that something anticipated
his
intention uh his his needs uh he has no
way except uh treating that experience
as another
human what Marx calls a false
consciousness and uh later
anthropologists called partial
Consciousness is the same
idea basically in in experience uh of of
a person you find a a thing a thing on
the market and the thing on the market
has handles it has proper sizes uh it
has uses that like it fits the other
things in your house uh in experience of
consumer it is as if uh thing
anticipated your needs it it perfectly
designed to be convenient to you and uh
whenever you ex encounter anything
perfectly designed to be convenient for
you uh you have no way to to separate it
like nature doesn't produce things that
are perfectly suited for you like chairs
and H there must have been a human who
anticipated your intent and be due to
anony anonymizing nature of
Market the real human who anticipated
your intent is hidden and we have to
invent invest subjectivity into the
thing that uh
possesses this that anticipates our
needs so this is a subjective experience
of fetishism when for the purpose of the
person consuming the thing
or using the thing it might as well be
true that thing has anticipated it its
intentions and when thing then
doesn't perform well it can make you
indignant and angry at the thing because
well you made to serve and you don't
serve
properly
uh
so why this pie called fetishism and
social
creativity uh
because David Graber traces the
fetishism to any Associates fetishism to
any kind of change in a society and Marx
sees fetishism as a way of
obscuring the
exploitation both of these are true
statements
the conclusions that you can draw from
that for Marx is fetishism used to buy
the ruling class to hide the value to
obscure it and therefore to maintain
stories that facilitate
exploitation therefore it is necessary
to defeat the fetishism by learning more
knowledge expanding your
perspective makes you know more and
therefore
you you stop believing in fetishes you
stop uh you start seeing the real value
that is for Marks coming from labor
doesn't matter uh what is important is
that we we need to defeat fetishism or
superstitions through
knowledge and uh what David shows is
that uh f ism is a necessary part of
social creativity and any attempt to
defeat it
completely denies as a theory of social
change it
locks marks included into these binary
where either nothing has change nothing
changing or we run up against uh
transcendental Break um whatever changes
will
will have to change radically it has to
be complete break with the past when
when continuation of the present is is
just not possible the gradual change
just phased out of this picture because
it has to do with some kind of
superstition David makes his case
on how fetishism is necess for social
change by showing
the
how people who create
fetishes they do not exactly have the
same
perspective not only have this this
perspective of um Superstition they
actually when they create a fetish they
usually stand are fully aware that they
are making a pretend thing but they also
all of
them agree choose to believe choose to
pretend treat the fetish as a real
thing and both perspectives are
simultaneously available it is it is
simultaneously uh when when you create
some kind of totem that can strike you
with lightning if you like steal someone
else's property
well they know that they just made it up
but they also know that uh it will
actually happen and they they choose to
believe in it and they choose to act as
if it will actually
happen the specific situation where this
was recorded first
time is interesting
because there we had two very different
cultures different in a sense that they
they have enough commonality to
recognize each other as sort of similar
but they at the same time have one
particular aspect of their cosmology so
radically different opposed and and
alien to each other that they have
to find a way to do this exchange of for
gold somehow find a way to create new
social fors every time
because they they simultaneously need to
treat each other as humans but also
can't uh for Europeans it is just
totally insulting to the the cosmology
of
Africans which has to do with the nature
of of of social of political power or we
can go into it a little bit more if
someone has
questions
well that
maybe yeah maybe the last part of the
story is what exactly happens with
fetishism first it is necessary to
establish that in subjective experience
of the
fetishist uh the illusion is true or
might as well be true and uh for some of
them it will
be choice to choose to treat it as true
for some for others it will just be a
given
uh experience that they would actually
believe in it as if Christian person
believes in in existence of God same way
like person working on a factory in 1940
would believe that money is a commodity
and
embodies like the the value of Labor in
the same way it it's the same experience
uh well the the last
uh what what Michael mentioned uh the
last chapter of the piece on social
creativity brings up all the strengths
and
Pro proposes a theory why that should be
so why fetishism is necessary to
negotiate any kind of social
change the partial Consciousness uh as
like Marx uh goes through intentions of
people
later later sociologist and specifically
psychologist uh find a better way of
explaining this experience through
childhood
development uh the partial here is is
ability to only see a part of a system
one is
being the only part of a
whole the fantasy here is that what of a
child who does not have any boundary
between himself and the world and thinks
that everything in everyone in the world
can know what he can as childhood
matures he can literally switch into
someone else's perspective like a point
of view to imagine that uh the person
who can look behind the corner can see
something that you can't and then the
the third person who can see the same
that second person can see the same
thing and you
can't uh that experience of Shifting
point of view uh into another person and
then being able to compose person points
of view of the different people
together uh that experience of Des
centering is an example of partial
Consciousness when you do not have this
ability to see behind the corner then
this means you have partial
Consciousness and as
you mature and become capable of
coordinate multiple points of view in
your head multiple points of view of
other people in your
head then you start
uh seeing picture as a whole uh
extending your your your perspective
into into the into the some kind of a
hole if you can see the entire hole then
there is no place for fetishism there is
no place for f for Superstition you know
the internal mechanisms of
everything so the quest to eliminate
fetishism means one has to understand
the entire hle but that can only happen
when hle isn't changing over time if the
system that you're trying to understand
changes over time then you in you end up
in being the in Endless race to catch up
there is always a place for
fetishism the
radical
example of that is when this the hall
that you're trying to create doesn't
exist at all when the act of fetishism
actually creates a new
hle like for example a tiny Market where
you can exchange gold for beads at a
certain rate uh which like the the world
outside doesn't exist the the history of
previous transactions doesn't exist
between this particular European
Merchant and this particular African
Merchant
they have to make it up on on a spot and
they create some kind of overarching
perspective
well whenever for the purposes of
creating new any kind of new social
form it is necessary to when new form is
already imagined but doesn't exist yet
uh
the fetishism is an act of uh explaining
this new form so that others could
emulate it if they choose and then it
may take the life on its own or it may
not take the life on its own
depends
so the binary that David lays out uh not
explicitly here but uh in other places
is is between Magic and
theology the Magic in in anthropology
being uh the attempts of people of
individuals to transform the reality by
Supernatural
means and uh religion in anthropology is
uh when people subjugate to higher
authority or when they change Reality by
becoming a society that the the the
religion is Magic of sociality and Magic
is uh is Magic of individual so
fetishism here uh for David is a is a
spectrum between
them when when individual magic becomes
uh a magic of two people a magic of
community a magic of society a magic of
the world and uh the constituting
mechanism the time when two people
actually came up together and agreed to
do something becomes phased out
forgotten and uh as ideology replaces
magic it insists that we never actually
made the social agreement that social
agreement is a part of Nature and
um and this is how it connects to social
contract and
creativity well uh as for half an hour
recap of 60 pages I hope I managed to to
drive a little
bit at least connected connected
thoughts uh for people who want to poke
holes or or want
to want better connection in what I just
described I open up a
floor I think Michael started from the
comment uh
I was just commenting on um your your
discussion of people coming together and
and um do do they actually know the
rules u i mean it's slightly more like
Nuance point in relationship to what you
were saying but another sort of famous
example is activists
in globalization mement all came
together and some of them had particular
ways of inter acting others weren't
familiar with that and they had to kind
of negotiate what they were doing and if
you become very constitutionalist though
let's figure out all the rules exactly
before we start doing stuff you you
never get anything done and so that
phrase um uh walking while talking was a
key sort of message for people who were
doing organizing to get on and go do it
to sort of just go change things even
though you couldn't see the totality as
you were of everything you couldn't see
everyone's perspective and so you had to
just sort of deal with a bit of the
world that you were dealing with which
was trying to guess what the other
people you were working with having a
basic good idea that yeah we can trust
these people will um do that I was gonna
flag um um
uh similar to this the idea of how um so
the this basic idea of how change
happens as either oh it's total change
of Revolution or it's the same thing
that happens all the time we're just
doing the same things and on page
423 there was this they talked about
Marcel Mouse had a background of like
people interacting was either Total War
um like the Hobs and War of all against
all or total reciprocity we're all a big
community and we share everything and
there's no market system there's no um
uh violent no violence within our
community this and so it's either one or
the other but in fact um they he also
talks about the idea of sort of
partial um contracts in
between that time where you you you
maybe it's not total reciprocity you
don't always work together with everyone
in your village but you kind of have a
deal with one person you do this and
I'll do that and and
um those types of partial um agreements
and maybe that's also very similar to
the argument in the paper um about Marx
is talking about creativity but in his
actual practice either seems It's
Revolution or capitalist production
process and the production process is
always the same so I wondered how if
anybody if people had ideas about how
these ideas can help us think about um
the everyday type of changes that we
might
do well um
I'll you say the page uh uh which P
which book are you looking at at the F
yeah the article that we read the um
okay creativity page 423 but we don't
have to go into it specifically I would
just sort of maybe I'll throw that out
and see if it comes out in the
various
yes people have there is some there is a
summary uh right next to to the to what
you proposed uh by Alan Khali uh which
uh David brings up here so yes uh the
difference uh between two kinds of
social
contracts which both can be negotiated
by different kinds of by fetishism but
uh the contracts themselves are
different uh what what uh drives
essential difference between hsian war
of all against all and rousan Noble
Savage and then um between Total War and
total reciprocity of mous the the
summary of the difference is that uh
either you have contracts which impose
conditional
unconditionality or they impose
unconditional conditionality
uh the what that actually the scur means
uh either you enter in a relationships
where you must obey the rules of the
game uh to the letter but uh the act of
entering and exiting of the
relationships is conditional you you
choose to enter and if rules of the game
don't if you don't like the rules of the
game you exit
uh the other kind of contract is when uh
the rules can be sort of flexible but uh
the act of following them is not that
the being the part of the community who
has to follow this set of rules is not
you unconditionally enter into
the into the Society of law but the laws
themselves could kind of be like Shifty
and so on uh so Total War shows exactly
this situation when you do not choose to
enter the war the other party does and
you kind of find yourself in a war but
the rules of the war actually has to be
renegotiated all the time where while
Mouse's
uh opposition to this total reciprocity
where you must uh
render unconditional support
to to people you
choose requires you to choose in the
people you don't render your
unconditional support to the society
there is always it always starts with
two individuals making the total uh
offer of total reciprocity to each other
and then it can scale up to to bigger
groups um or scale or
not so uh I see the L
hand yes okay so I in order to
understand fetishism a bit more I maybe
wanted to bring in an analogy of like a
different context where I see a lot of
similarities that might kind of shine
light on how fism works as I'm trying to
understand it and that context I think
it games and for example like sports
games like uh
football where you know
games can emerge in all sorts of
contexts where they can kind of they're
multiple people together and they agree
to kind of engage in some sort of
activity and then certain rules might
emerge and that might become more formal
over time and um people will kind of
recognize different Stakes within this
game and they will start to experience
different emotions and there will be
like the sense of like winning and
losing or something being fair or unfair
within the context of that game where
the rules are actually totally arbitrary
because they were just kind of um in in
the Inception kind of defining that game
is totally arbitrary you kind of find
some sort of a football for example or a
tennis ball or whatever that you play
with and then you build all of these
constraints around it and then something
like that can grow something into what
football is today where it's kind of a
global phenomen phena and um for example
there referees that determine what is
right and wrong that kind of act as like
judges in a way and if you don't follow
the rules uh you are forced off the game
and you are threatened with potentially
losing money
um all of these different things
and to me if if fetishes are kind of the
same thing just in terms of like social
contracts and like contracts exchange or
contracts of mutual Aid or something
like that it seems like that's kind of
similar to games in a way where there's
um they can kind of emerge very
arbitrarily and then grow in and become
more
formalized um yeah I just wanted to put
that analogy out there to kind
of hopefully draw some generalizations
to maybe understand feis and more and
and those yeah and understand how like
the mechanisms of it yeah the mechanisms
yes uh first of all it is it is spot on
uh the example anyone who saw uh the
other person really engagedly playing in
Counter Strike or anything trying to
peek behind the Monitor and hide under
the monitor that uh yeah you can't say
that this person is pretending right
um well but uh
the the internal mechanism for that I
found the best example for that is an
improv theer if you go to any kind of
improv theer training the first thing
you will encounter is that
uh we deal with the offer of another
person we honor this offer and then we
extend this offer and uh then we stop
playing this game and start playing
another game the simplest example that
uh like I had in my experience is that
we come to this improv training uh
session and the person in charge
arranges us in a circle and says that we
have to clap in in in order one person
clubs another person clubs and and then
it it moves right and uh in in after
some time he asks like what
moves well you have people in the corner
and they clapping uh
faster and faster the experience of a
person in the center is that actually
Club is moving the the the source of
sound is kind of moving right and uh we
just agreed to do that but for outside
Observer it is absolutely not impossible
to imagine that there is some invisible
entity flying across a circle making a
club right and uh then uh we could
pretend that it is the new player comes
in and if he doesn't clap we can say
well invisible Spirit doesn't like you
go away right uh he doesn't make you
clap and then if you choose to clap then
okay you're now like you share our
fantasy this part of uh this example
of play of establishing the rules of the
game
uh is very similar to giving an oath
which which which is what uh West
African fetishism is about uh which is
what Madagascar uh examples are about
and in my personal experience uh you
have like people giving an oath to the
to the banner right the military giving
an O to the banner of their unit and
then choosing to invest this um this
piece of cloth with some kind of well
you really feel you really do feel
indignant emotionally when someone
desecrates it so the act of first of all
you you come up with the rules what
David calls play and then you enact the
rules the more you enact the rules the
more this uh Supernatural power of uh of
a material token to evoke emotions
becomes embedded but then the play is
about renegotiating it like uh soccer
established all kind of um
conventions uh like football whatever
but then if you go to some kind of like
people playing football they don't
bother about like kids playing football
they don't bother about rules that much
they they make up rules all the time and
this is that experience of
U creating new rules uh which eventually
end
up uh driving the game
which makes us feel as there
is subjectivity there is as we can have
a relationship with something that
represents the rule uh I I see the
Christian hand and I will just uh take
uh three minutes maybe to explain the
one concept that I I was hoping to
explain later the concept is that of
Shifting
the symbol of the value into the source
of the value same as fetishism uh
transforms uh something that doesn't
have Consciousness into something that
does have Consciousness uh it is a same
move as um you have say the the banner
like the picture that evokes uh courage
you give this picture to the person and
he starts showing courageous Behavior or
an example of Marx uh when money
represent labor right but the moment uh
there's a symbol but the moment you can
motivate people to do labor to receive
that symbol they become source of the
behavior rather than symbol the behavior
this transformation uh when fetishism
connects to Value when uh the symbol of
the Behavior Uh be became capable of
evoking this Behavior again making
people emulated and this is what happens
when you establish the rules of the game
like you playe and then uh people gaming
the game or by Gaming the game they
honor the the rules that you established
before they emulated and this is what
Society is about Society is is just
actions which people repeat so long as
people repeat actions the same actions
uh the same Society is going if people
suddenly start uh doing different
actions to symbolize the marriage
ceremony then you you are in the
presence of different
Society so uh so yes the games uh
especially computer games in today
should be the seen
as as totally
fruitful domain of exploration of
phenomena yes
Christian yeah thanks
um uh my my my question is a little
different though
um you said the moment ideology replaces
magic the social contract is forgotten
do I did I remember that
correct uh uh what is forgotten is that
people have negotiated a contract it is
uh it turns into the fantasy of tet
agreement that is explicitly stated in
the social contract of rouso that is of
course people never negotiated it but
God made it happen yeah but there was
something before that was constitutive
of this and that kind of Fades into the
background so to speak yeah and that
kind I think ties into what you said in
the beginning that people intentionally
reproduce Society every day and I would
dispute
intentionally uh like what you said
before when you have the change from
symbol of value to source of value a lot
of these
changes once they have happened they
fade into the background they have
forgotten and uh in a way that's where
the power lies because you don't see
anymore what moves things you know
people just repeat the action
unintentionally I would argue and they
repeat the action unintentionally
because it's kind of working and you
know it would be a conscious effort to
change things and you know a lot of
stuff just runs on on uh on autopilot so
to speak um so what I agree with what
you say that people can you know
renegotiate recreate society that
creativity plays a role here um the
interesting part is that this I think
what you describe is a mechanism that
creates something and then obscures
itself H which seems pretty magical to
me as well and um which reminds me I
think it was Luman or something who said
like you know it's like this uh thing
the blind spot in your eye you can see
that you can't
see well um so as long as you have these
these this kind of Mech it's kind of
interesting because the mechanism that
is used to create the new thing then
seems to make
change harder
right
uh um the in when I tell about
intentional actions or when basically
David explains intentional actions in in
a theory of uh if of
value uh it is not an intention of
creating the whole of society when
people repeat an action they do it
intentionally and they do it
intentionally to to make this the same
action being repeated by other people uh
but they don't make it intentionally the
they don't intentionally reproduce the
whole of society this is what allows
uh um hiding the obscuring the the
exploitation but there is also this
challenge exactly was directed at David
to David
uh when he was working on theory of
value and uh What
uh what David had to concede eventually
uh to The partially is that yes there
are people uh who do not
who for who who reproduce actions
unintentionally uh his example has to do
with Madagascar he uncovers uh that uh
people actually the reproduction of
charms and reproduction of political
power is completely intentional it it is
intentionally encoded in a ritual it is
spoken just off stage that people
understand the fetishism of it but as he
go go later uh respond he tries to
respond to the challenge exactly that
challenge and he goes to read older
materials and there he finds that well
actually no not like there are quite a
lot of people who personal
experience is that uh actions kind of
choosing them that uh they repeat
actions completely
unintentionally uh it is
it is a part of that mechanism where
where so symbol of value becomes a
source of value and then symbolic part
of it becomes forgotten and uh people in
in a people's experience they choose
to make these actions and treat them as
valuable because for them it might as
well be true his specific example having
to do with u
people uh living in some kind of
villages and obeying some kind of rules
well uh they don't have the
chance an option of disobeying the rules
and therefore they choose to believe
that enforcing mechanism doesn't does
really exist because uh enforcing
mechanism describes something that the
the exploitation that basically nature
does to them at this point in time and
uh they just choose to think this way
the same experience that uh
that makes it possible to accumulate
value in in in a currency in money which
is also of this uh of this piece it is a
bigger theme in the theory of value that
the way how money can only become store
of value in the first place is that you
take someone uh
and force someone to do stupid
unintentional uh alienated uh [__]
job for life for multiple generations
for 14 hours a day and then and the only
thing the person gets for it is money
and then this just forces person to
forget like to disre guard constitutive
mechanism and in in the experience of
the factory worker money do really
accumulate value it it is it is simply
true uh same as uh
flag accumulates the value
of patriotism
or well the any kind any number of
examples you can draw from computer
games anything um so yes there is an
intentional part of recreating society
but it necessarily must uh
have first of all constitutive moment
and then it needs a enough people who
actually see through illusion to
maintain it
intentionally
wouldn't there also be enforcement by
violence though absolutely violence is a
major part of putting people into
position where uh [__] rules become
true if some uh King that that example
comes from shilok Material uh but from
on King's book uh well if uh a king
makes up uh a rule
that uh anyone who doesn't do a certain
movement must be killed and
then W and behold you disobey rule the
rule you get killed that that just
becomes a material reality of your life
and then rule becomes well as like the
power of a king basically becomes magic
he he actually can can make things to
happen to other people by just making up
arbitrary
rule so yeah violence is
a the major major Cornerstone and
even go I maybe just comment on that is
there's also um at some level an
agreement amongst the king and some of
the Kings
people which is oh if the king says
something we'll back the king up ual can
do the violence the king could go and
kill people themsel but it's that
becomes much harder um until there is
some type of social agreement that's
there but all of those agreements I
suppose um you know different people
will have different investment in the
social agreement that's made I
suppose yeah this is this is
uh I I haven't finished studying it I
need to read it a few more times to to
use this material
uh competently but uh the the overall
story uh with Kings is a story of a
stranger King when first of all you you
before you have Kings uh on the ground
you have Kings in in heaven uh people do
uh people living in communities without
Kings already do things to each other to
impose some kind of social order they do
it pretending to be like they say that
some kind of God or whatever does it
created a rule and for that rule you you
need to be punished for breaking it
whatever the problem is the problem of
judgment uh human societies uh dis uh
favor people who do not uh who can act
without prejudice and uh whenever you
have a sit situation when you need to
pronounce judgment on something you need
someone without prejudice you need
someone who who can stand outside of
social order and be um not associated
with any party well uh there you have uh
in a properly constituted Society you
have deficit of uh people who who can be
um dispassionate about uh any kind of
issue and this is how stranger King idea
happens uh that some kind of uh brute
comes in uh tries to do do violence to
society Society drives him off and then
invites him back as uh as um someone
who uh they delegate the power of
punishment so there is constitutive
mechanism where he basically uh becomes
a symbol of society's judgment that it
does to itself but then it can run away
unless you unless you pull Kings down
and uh and stop them from becoming like
like magical entities they start feeling
as being like it you start really they
become fetishes Kings become magical
charms I cannot read any comments if
anyone reads all the comments can can
and if there are questions in the
comments can someone just pass them on
to
me
uh I just wanted to say that yeah just
sorry Michael uh I just wanted to to
mention that there is 6 minutes after 4
so maybe we can take a last question and
then uh St if you want to announce the
theme for the next group that's will be
the time to do that now uh do you
remember what and when is that so then
we can wrap up today and then continue
next
time I
I was only yeah I was only going to say
that it would be great to to hear some
comments from people who a bunch of
people said oh I've been reading David
gber for ages just on my own and this is
a chance to talk so we don't maybe not
questions that we have chance to answer
but just comments and then we're also
gonna be doing this again in a month on
this on this similar
topic
somebody like
yeah okay stas I think you should wrap
up then yeah all right so my original
idea was to separate the fetishism from
social creativity and uh I seem to being
capable to of doing so uh idea was to
dedicate this uh to to dedicate today to
the to fetishism and uh next session to
social creativity and then uh merge them
together I still feel that this was me
uh sailing through different uh strands
of the story and
uh there are plenty of things that I
have admitted
because well um because it
is improv theer for me right
now
uh I would think that uh we could do
another
one on this exact piece and then just
have me speak less and have other people
uh do more questions do it more
interactive uh with the audience um yeah
uh the next one after that I was
thinking at looking at
um
consumption um the there is a David Pon
consumption which is ultimately about uh
value
how destroying things is a prototype of
uh in our
society I will try to connect it uh in
was